---
title: Aura for PHP | Packages (v2)
layout: site
active: packages-v2
---

Aura v2 Packages
================

The guiding principle behind the v2 releases is to continue [the process that led to Aura in the first place](/packages): identifying and then separating functionality into independent, fully decoupled libraries.

With v2, we add the concept of "kernel" (`*_Kernel`) and "project" (`*_Project`) packages. Whereas library packages have no dependencies, kernel and project packages combine other packages together, and so are dependent on those packages.

The current v2 packages are:

{% include packages-v2.md %}


From v1 to v2
-------------

Some notable differences between v1 and v2 packages follow.

- Use PSR-4 instead of PSR-0. These are compatible autoloader standards, at least as far as Aura is concerned.  This means shallower `src/` and `tests/` directories.

- Where possible, support PHP 5.3. PHP 5.4 adoption has just not been as wide as we had expected, and we don't want to artifically limit Aura use any more than necessary. Practically speaking, this means that if a package does not use traits, it can be backported to PHP 5.3.

- Remove the `meta/` directory as an artifact of multiple-packaging-system support.

- Use Composer's `library` type instead of `aura-package`, and drop the custom `aura-package` Composer installer.

- Packages ending in `_Kernel` and `_Project` are co-dependent packages intended to set up Composer projects via `create-project`.  The `_Kernel` package is the core code for the project, and the `_Project` package is the project skeleton.  (Packages without these suffixes are still truly independent and fully decoupled libraries.)
